Comments?
Like PDK at www.
facebook.com/pdkintl

Privacy and school data

Ethical and appropriate
data use requires
data literacy
Student data can be a powerful, transformative tool in teaching,
but to reap those potential benefits practitioners must become
more data literate.
By Ellen B. Mandinach, Brennan M. Parton,
Edith S. Gummer, and rachel anderson
Teachers know all the terms: data-driven decision making, data-informed decision making, data-based decision making, data use, iterative cycles of inquiry, and
more. Whatever you call it, data-driven decision making is a hot topic
in education. It also has become a focal point for strong opinions  
positive and negative. Policy makers believe student achievement
will improve when educators use data to inform their teaching.
Yet the research evidence proving this is inconsistent at best
(Carlson, Borman, & Robinson, 2011; Hamilton et al., 2009;
Konstantopoulos, Miller, & van der Ploeg, 2013).
Many educators worry about the growing emphasis and reliance on data. Some teachers actually refer to data as “the other
four-letter word”   time being the first one. Teachers say that
poring over reams of data takes time from where they want to be
  in the classroom with students. Skepticism abounds, and concerns about how data are used are very real. Some educators
worry that data are part of the “gotcha,” being used
to evaluate their performance in unrealistic ways.
What s more, they say the data they are being required to examine has little utility in their practice.
ELLEn B. MandInach (emandin@wested.org)
is senior research scientist and director of the Data
for Decisions initiative at WestEd, San Francisco,
Calif. BrEnnan M. Parton is a senior associate,
state policy and advocacy for Data Quality Campaign,
Washington, D.C. EdIth S. GUMMEr is a senior
research associate in the evaluation research program
at WestEd. rachEL andErSon is a policy analysis
and research associate at Data Quality Campaign.
V96 N5

Illustration: Thinkstock/iStock

kappanmagazine.org 25

Downloaded from pdk.sagepub.com at Univ of the West of England on September 11, 2016

K1502_February.indd 25

12/19/14 10:31 AM

Parents and the broader public share those concerns and have raised issues about what data are
being collected about students, how they are being used, whether they are secure, and who has
access to them. Data breaches at the federal level
and in the private sector have garnered media attention and stoked fears. Regulations to guide data
use and protect the privacy and confidentiality of
student data exist in the Family Educational Rights
and Privacy Act (FERPA). But FERPA is not easy
to understand. Parents likely receive a legal notice
about FERPA from their school district each year.
Teachers and administrators likely receive FERPA
compliance training annually. But such notices and
training don t help parents and teachers understand
their rights and roles in protecting student privacy,
and they sometimes lead to fear that nothing should
be done with the data.

Ethical and responsible data use is part of
knowing how to use data, and that knowledge
focuses on how to protect student privacy and
maintain confidentiality of student data.

Gummer and Mandinach (in press) have defined a
construct they call data literacy for teaching:
The ability to transform information into actionable
instructional knowledge and practices by collecting,
analyzing, and interpreting all types of data (assessment, school climate, behavioral, snapshot, longitudinal, moment-to-moment, etc.) to help determine
instructional steps. It combines an understanding
of data with standards, disciplinary knowledge and
practices, curricular knowledge, pedagogical content
knowledge, and an understanding of how children
learn.

The construct has three main domains of knowledge, which combine to enable teachers to know
what the data mean in terms of their content area
and within a learning progression and then to translate that knowledge into instructional steps.
• Data use for teaching or what might be
considered the ability to analyze and use data.
• Content knowledge or the teacher s understanding of a specific domain or subject.
• Pedagogical content knowledge (Shulman,
1986) or the ability to apply knowledge of
pedagogy in the context of the content area.
These domains are composed of components
comprising specific skills that are all part of an inquiry cycle and include:
• How to identify problems of practice;
• How to frame questions;
• How to use data;
• How to transform data into information;
• How to transform information into a decision;
• How to evaluate the outcomes of a decision.

For teachers, using data ethically   in a way that s
mindful of their responsibility to keep individual student information private   is a requirement of using data effectively. So how do we help educators
understand their role in protecting student data and
using data responsibly? The short answer is that they
need to be data literate.
data literacy and ethics

Data use is not an isolated event (Earl & Katz,
2006). Data use should be a continuous, integrated
part of practice that is used all the time. In fact,
Mandinach (2012) maintains that good teachers
have been employing data-driven decision making
all along   it just hasn t been recognized by that
term. But there is more work to be done to ensure
that educators know how to continuously, effectively,
and ethically use data   that is, to help them to be
data literate.
26 Kappan

Ethical and responsible data use is part of knowing
how to use data, and that knowledge focuses on how
to protect student privacy and maintain confidentiality of student data. Such knowledge includes how
and when to discuss students  performance, behavior, attitudes, etc. with other teachers, administrators, and parents. It also includes knowing how to
remove identifying information from a student record and how to maintain proper student records  
whether electronic or in paper-and-pencil format. It
includes knowing who has access to student records
and when, how, and the process by which to release
data or results. Responsible data use also includes
knowing when and when not to discuss a student s
performance in public.
Take, for example, two teacher colleagues who run
into each other in the grocery story checkout line
and begin talking about a student who s experiencing

February 2015

Downloaded from pdk.sagepub.com at Univ of the West of England on September 11, 2016

K1502_February.indd 26

12/19/14 10:31 AM

taBLE 1.

an assessment of data use practices

Good practice

Practices to avoid

• Using data to differentiate instruction and group
students.

• Using data to track or label students as unable to
succeed.

• Using data walls to organize and clearly understand
student data
• Using data walls to talk to other teachers about
what the data show and problems of practice
• Placing data walls that contain student names
and other identifiers in rooms accessible only to
teachers and school leaders
• Removing student identiﬁers when those data walls
are moved to common areas

• Hanging data walls with student names and other
identifiers in classrooms where anyone who comes
into the room can see them
• Keeping data walls with student names or other
identifiers in rooms where the public might see
them during events or meetings

• Discussing student data at school in collaboration
with colleagues to set goals and identify problems
of practice

• Talking about individual student successes and
challenges in public

• Using student artifacts in collaboration with
other educators for collaboration and improving
practice

• Sharing student artifacts outside of an education
setting, such as on a web site like Pinterest,
Facebook, or Twitter

• Communicating about an individual student s data
with his or her parents

• Dismissing parent requests for data, or ignoring
their concerns about how it will be used
• Comparing a student s performance to that of other
individual students in conversations with parents

• Using only secure systems to upload and
manipulate personally identifiable information, such
as those provided by the state or district

• Storing or manipulating student data through
applications like Dropbox, on thumb drives, or in
email

some difficulties. Someone passes by and overhears
the teachers  discussion. That is a violation of the student s privacy, even if the teachers didn t mean to do
so and even if the passerby did not know the student.
But such a conversation would not be a privacy violation if the teachers were working in a data team or
a professional learning community, where the expectation is professional discourse about student performance, learning issues, and potential remediation.
See Table 1 for a more comprehensive assessment
of data practices.
These may be fine lines of distinction, but being

data literate requires that teachers know what constitutes responsible data use and what is inappropriate.
But the characterization of a construct such as data
literacy in terms of cognitive aspects of knowledge
and skills is only part of what we need to examine
to truly understand what teachers need to know and
be able to do. Educators also need to consider how
data literacy plays out in teacher identity, values, and
epistemic beliefs. How teachers see themselves as
data users   as individualists or part of a team  
influences what they do. The extent to which data
use is seen as a valuable addition to teacher practice
V96 N5

kappanmagazine.org 27

Downloaded from pdk.sagepub.com at Univ of the West of England on September 11, 2016

K1502_February.indd 27

12/19/14 10:31 AM

is important. And what teachers consider important
data or evidence has real implications for what they
will use.
States, districts, and educator preparation programs must do more to promote teacher data literacy and ethical use of data through policy, training,
and practice.

Responsible data use also includes knowing
when and when not to discuss a student s
performance in public.

The setting matters

Data literacy skills can become a powerful tool to
inform teacher practice. Teachers need to use data,
and they need to do it foremost in a way that is in
the interest of their students. Student-focused data
use includes:
• Using data to inform instruction;
• Using access to student data appropriately;
• Displaying data appropriately; and
• Disclosing and communicating data
appropriately.

Conclusion

Data literacy is a critical part of effective teaching, and as the proliferation of data increases, and as
parent and public concerns about the safety of data
remain, the ethical use of data must be a focus for
teachers. Teachers are the front-line communicators
to parents and their communities about education.
But as parents and the public at large express concerns over data use in education, they re also demonstrating that they don t fully trust educators to
use data in ways that benefit students. Teachers have
a new role to not only explain the value of data to
parents and the community but also to demonstrate
that they only and always use information in the best
interest of students.
Teachers cannot gain valuable data use skills in a
vacuum. There is much more to do to provide educators the support they need to access, interpret, act on,
and communicate data effectively and ethically, and
this includes promoting data literacy among state and
district leaders, and in teacher preparation programs.
Teachers need preservice and ongoing instruction in
using student data and their role in protecting it  
training on FERPA compliance alone won t lead to
ethical data use. All these actors have a role to play to
be sure that the public and teachers feel comfortable
that data are a tool for helping students, not tracking,
labeling, or shaming. 
K
References
Carlson, D., Borman, G.D., & Robinson, M. (2011). A
multistate district-level cluster randomized trial of the impact of
data-driven reform on reading and mathematics achievement.
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 33 (3), 378-398.
Earl, L.M. & Katz, S. (2006). Leading schools in a data-rich
world: Harnessing data for school improvement. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Gummer, E.S. & Mandinach, E.B. (in press). Building a
conceptual framework for data literacy. Teachers College
Record.
Hamilton, L., Halverson, R., Jackson, S.S., Mandinach,
E., Supovitz, J.A., & Wayman, J.C. (2009). Using student
achievement data to support instructional decision making.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Institute of
Education Sciences, National Center for Education Evaluation.
Konstantopoulos, S., Miller, S., van der Ploeg, A., Li, C.H.,
& Traynor, A. (2013). The impact of Indiana s system of
benchmark assessments on mathematics achievement.
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 35 (4), 481-499.
Mandinach, E.B. (2012). A perfect time for data use: Using
data-driven decision making to inform practice. Educational
Psychologist, 47 (2), 71-85.

“Not only did the cat eat my homework, it went viral on
YouTube.”
28 Kappan

Shulman, L.S. (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge
growth in teaching. Educational Researcher, 15 (2), 4-14.

February 2015

Downloaded from pdk.sagepub.com at Univ of the West of England on September 11, 2016

K1502_February.indd 28

12/19/14 10:31 AM

