American Secondary Education 43(2) Spring 2015

Data Literacy:
Real-World Learning Through
Problem-Solving With Data Sets
Author
Robin W. Erwin, Jr., Ph.D., is an Associate Professor and Chair for the De-

partment of Professional Studies at Niagara University in Niagara, New York.

Abstract
The achievement of deep learning by secondary students requires teaching
approaches that draw students into task commitment, integrated curricula,
and analytical thinking. By using real-world data sets in project based instructional units, teachers can guide students in analyzing, interpreting, and
reporting quantitative data. Working with authentic unfiltered, and previously un-interpreted data helps students to integrate data literacy with their
disciplinary learning.
Keywords: data literacy, authentic learning, authentic data sets, performance
based assessment, project learning, problem-based learning

There has been widespread agreement that students need to be highly proficient in literacy skills with language, but if students are to be well prepared
for college and careers, they need to be “literate” in their abilities to work
with data as well. In the face of increasing dependence on data analysis in
all sectors of life, there is a growing call for students to develop data literacy
(Gunter, 2007; Vahey et al., 2012). This article suggests that students can
do so by participating in authentic data analysis tasks within the context of
project-based learning (PBL) (Larmer & Mergendoller, 2010;  Mergendoller,
2012;  Moriyama, Satou, & King, 2002). In project based learning, students
attempt to solve authentic problems in a process characterized by driving
questions, inquiry and innovation, student voice and choice, and public presentation (Larmer & Mergendoller, 2010).  
Students engaged in project based learning are expected to sustain their
attention over large periods of time and to master content through an au18


Erwin

Data Literacy

thentic experience that connects with multiple curriculum areas and relates
to the learner s personal experiences. During that experience, teachers can
cultivate higher order thinking by providing students with a data set in a
raw form or by guiding students to create their own unique data set.  Such
data-analytic PBLs have several positive attributes. They are authentic learning tasks that encourage analytic thinking and meaningful experience with
quantitative analysis, and they foster task commitment, interdisciplinary
learning, and the integration of computers and literacy.  Asking thick driving questions is a key to an effective PBL experience.  To maximize the PBL
experience, Mergendoller (2012) urged teachers to identify driving questions
for a PBL experience that are not “Googleable,” that is, not answerable by a
simple Internet search.
Although it is important to work with real data sets, it is also true that the
learning task and challenge must be developmentally appropriate (Wormeli,
2014), within what Vygotsky has named the zone of proximal development,
so that the learner can perform the task if provided with peer or teacher support (Vygotsky, 1978). In that respect, a project based learning experience
for middle grades would need to look and feel different from a PBL experience for late secondary grades, with learning goals and data set complexity
that fit the developmental level of the learners. For example, a data set for
middle grade students may have two or three arrays of simple data in columns, whereas a data set for upper high school may utilize more complex
data in arrays of several columns, and may require more sophisticated types
of statistical analysis.

Examples of Project Based Learning with Data Sets
In two separate six-lesson projects, I guided sixth to eighth grade parochial
school students to use data sets obtained from www.gapminder.org. The
first project was introduced as part of a study of safety issues and practice.
The project examined mortality rates from injuries for children from birth to
age 5 using a data set that included statistics from over 170 societies.  The
second project was part of a unit that was studying access to clean water
resources around the world, especially in developing countries. The unit was
already underway when a data-based project on the availability of improved
water resources was introduced. The data set for that project spanned 10
years, and the analysis indicated improved water resources from more than
250 societies. During these data-based projects, I progressively instructed
students how to:
1. Consider the “story” or guiding question for the data-centric unit
2. Learn about the power and utility of basic descriptive statistics for
assigning meaning to large sets of data

19


Data Literacy 

Erwin

3. Learn some basic skills for how to use spreadsheet software to
examine large data sets
4. Examine a relevant data set
5. Clean the data in the data set
6. Analyze the data using basic statistical functions in a spreadsheet
7. Interpret the importance of the findings, and
8. Report the findings to an external audience.
Cleaning the data is a phrase to describe the work of improving the quality
of data in a dataset. This is typically achieved by removing blank or duplicate
rows, formatting numbers in a consistent manner, fixing discontinuities in
column or row indexing, or any actions that improve the usability and quality of data in a dataset.  As a result of these projects, the participating students
demonstrated a satisfactory grasp of fundamental concepts of the scientific
research process, the process or organizing and cleaning the data, the use
of descriptive statistics to better understand the data, and the use of spreadsheet software to efficiently and accurately generate statistical analyses. The
students also appreciated the greater objectivity gained through evidence
when describing patterns in the data and reporting interpretations based on
the data. There were rich conversations among groups of students that were
challenged to analyze their data sets and develop inferences. The students,
the classroom teacher, and the author considered the two projects to be valuable and successful learning experiences.

Research Supporting Data-based Projects
One scholarly initiative aimed at providing the resources and tools to support
student learning with real data sets is the “Oceans of Data” project (Krumhansl et al., 2012). In this project, genuine scientific data sets and their graphic representations are key components in educating scientifically-minded
learners. The project aims to maximize access to developmentally appropriate and useable data from oceanographic research across K-16 education.
The graphic representations provided through this project are exemplars for
visually communicating data analyses. Thorsen (2009) also described several
examples of real data work using database and spreadsheets in which students were involved in collecting, managing, manipulating, interpreting, and
applying data to real world problems.
Several researchers have documented some of the benefits of data based
projects at the middle-school level. Vahey et al. (2012), conducted a study
of seventh-grade students  work with data sets and essential questions. Students in this quasi-experimental study were taught to analyze authentic data
20


Erwin

Data Literacy

sets by using proportional reasoning and then analyzing the data for what it
could show regarding the driving questions. The students that were taught
with the data-centric methods had significant learning advantages over the
control group with a very large effect size for the treatment group. Hammond
(2010) examined the positive interaction of learner cognition, motivation,
and competence among middle grade students. The learning tasks in that
study were highly authentic for the students, who served as apprentices in an
exploratory, non-profit, educational, but real community bike shop.
At the college level, DeLuca and Lari (2011) conducted a study with
students who were studying renewable energy sources by working with authentic, real world data to think and solve problems like real scientists. Findings in their study indicated that learners who accessed real-world data sets
learned more thoroughly and with deeper mastery of scientific concepts than
other learners who did not work with authentic data.
Wyner (2013) reported that teacher candidates who accessed and analyzed authentic climate data outperformed other groups of teacher candidates who pursued the same learning objectives in a book-centered curriculum. Ucar and Trundle (2011) observed the same benefits among teacher
candidates who worked with authentic ocean tidal data retrieved from web
databases; these learners gained a much stronger and more accurate grasp of
the scientific principles involved in tidal dynamics than learners using other
more traditional approaches.
In these examples, the students were functioning in the manner of neophyte scientists, collecting or acquiring authentic data relevant to their investigation, organizing and analyzing that data, drawing appropriate inferences,
and reporting their finding to an interested audience. The data may be directly collected by the students or acquired as data sets available for scientific
inquiry. The data might be as wide-ranging as historical documents, survey
responses, field counts, or measures of performance.

Benefits of Projects Using Data Sets
The activities described above are clearly at the higher levels of Bloom s
taxonomy (Anderson et al., 2001), and the highest levels of Webb s depth of
knowledge criteria (Hess, Jones, Carlock, & Walkup, 2009).  These and other
benefits of projects using data sets are discussed in more detail below.

Authenticity Fosters Motivation and Task Commitment
Learning tasks are authentic when they have more than a grade value to
the student, particularly when they have value in a community outside the
classroom. The products of these authentic tasks are shared with more than
just the teacher as evaluator, usually with some external audience. Authentic
learning tasks focus on solutions to “real-world, complex problems by using
role-playing exercises, problem-based activities, case studies, and participa21


Data Literacy 

Erwin

tion in virtual communities of practice. Neo, Neo, and Tan (2012) argued
for the importance of authenticity in learning as part of their study of student
motivation in a web-based learning environment. They reported that when
students perceived a learning task to be authentic, their commitment to
the task increased.  With careful planning and implementation, data-analytic
PBLs may have this authentic quality for students.
For many students, real life data analysis and interpretation activities
cultivate intrinsic motivation and sustained attention to the task. This sustained attention and intrinsic motivation is a significant benefit of real data
since the learners  work toward the learning goals is typically difficult to
achieve without such learner buy-in. Renzulli and Reis (1997) refer to this
buy-in as “task commitment,” and it is a key to effective learning in complex learning activities that require full concentration and effort over multiple
work sessions.

Fostering Problem-Solving and Higher Level Thinking
The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, in their Principles and
Standards for School Mathematics   Problem Solving (2000), emphasizes the
importance of the process of problem solving:
Problem solving is an integral part of all mathematics learning. In
everyday life and in the workplace, being able to solve problems
can lead to great advantages. However, solving problems is not only
a goal of learning mathematics but also a major means of doing so.
Problem solving should not be an isolated part of the curriculum but
should involve all Content Standards.
Problem solving means engaging in a task for which the solution is not
known in advance. Good problem solvers have a “mathematical disposition”, they analyze situations carefully in mathematical terms and naturally
come to pose problems based on situations they see.
Working with students over an extended time to analyze real data,
interpret, and apply the results fits well with the fourth and highest level
of Webb s Depth of Knowledge criteria (Hess, Jones, Carlock, & Walkup,
2009), a level which is characterized by sustained effort over multiple learning sessions involving analytical thinking about complex problems.

Meeting Common Core State Standards
The Common Core State Standards argue for preparing students for college,
careers, and other life activities. The Standards expect much in the way of analytical, multi-step thinking and problem-solving (Porter, McMaken, Hwang,
& Yang, 2011). Working with raw data supports that kind of learning as learners clean and organize the data appropriately for analysis, apply the proper
22


Erwin

Data Literacy

analytical tools, interpret the analysis, and make an appropriate application
to a real world situation. People in data-related careers perform this organizing of raw data as part of their regular work. From this perspective, a teacher
who starts with authentic data collection, or with data sets that are unrefined
and un-interpreted, and then challenges learners to engage in this data-analytic work is helping students to reach the CCSS expectation of preparing for
college and careers.
The Common Core State Standards (2010) include several Standards for
Mathematical Practice that may be addressed in data-centric PBLs, including
the following:
1.  Make sense of problems and persevere in solving them.
2.  Reason abstractly and quantitatively.
5.  Use appropriate tools strategically.
7.  Look for and make use of structure.
PBL using raw data may be designed to meet CCSS Anchor standards in other
subjects such as Reading, and Speaking and Listening (see Table 1).  

Table 1. CCSS Anchor Standards That Can be Addressed through PBL
Using Raw Data
CCSS Anchor Standards for Reading, grades 6-12
7.  Integrate and evaluate content presented in diverse formats and media,
including visually and quantitatively, as well as in words.
8.  Delineate and evaluate the argument and specific claims in a text, including the validity of the reasoning as well as the relevance and sufficiency of
the evidence.
10.  Read and comprehend complex literary and informational texts independently and proficiently.

CCSS Anchor Standards for Writing, grades 6-12
7.  Conduct short as well as more sustained research projects based on
focused questions, demonstrating understanding of the subject under
investigation.
8.  Gather relevant information from multiple print and digital sources, assess
the credibility and accuracy of each source, and integrate the information
while avoiding plagiarism.
9. Draw evidence from literary or informational texts to support analysis, reflection, and research.

23


Data Literacy 

Erwin

CCSS Anchor Standards for Speaking and Listening, grades 6 12
1.  Prepare for and participate effectively in a range of conversations and collaborations with diverse partners, building on others  ideas and expressing
their own clearly and persuasively.
2.  Integrate and evaluate information presented in diverse media and formats,
including visually, quantitatively, and orally.
4.  Present information, findings, and supporting evidence such that listeners
can follow the line of reasoning and the organization, development, and
style are appropriate to task, purpose, and audience.
5.  Make strategic use of digital media and visual displays of data to express
information and enhance understanding of presentations.

Using Computer Software
Although data collection and analysis may be conducted without computer
technology, students may benefit by using computer software as they work
with real data. Programs like Excel, and in some cases Systat and SPSS, are
within reach of most adolescent learners, especially when the students can
see the power of this software to support efficient analysis of large data sets
(Drier, Dawson, & Garofalo, 1999). Using such software also builds students 
preparedness for college and careers. Too few educators appear to understand how important it is to engage students in these kinds of technologysupported higher order thinking activities (Lawrence, Calhoun, Milton, &
Vozzo, 2013; So & Kim, 2009), but an increasing emphasis on data literacy
in schools may be changing that.
For an excellent source of downloadable data sets on a variety of economic, political, and scientific issues for potential use in school settings, see
http://www.gapminder.org/. Another useful source of authentic online data
sets is https://tuvalabs.com/. InspireData is a software package developed
by Inspiration Software, www.inspiration.com/InspireData, that supports students  data analysis, especially by creating visualizations of data for analysis.
Another rich website for teachers seeking resources for data literacy is http://
www.statlit.org/.

Conclusion
By using real data in Project-Based Learning, students will grow in numeracy
and content knowledge, and they will be able to apply their literacy skill
in disciplinary settings. Students will accomplish real intellectual work that
is not just a practice activity within the school but rather has worth to the
community. The integration of these multiple strands of the curriculum in
data-centric PBLs provides students with meaningful study and learning in a
potentially time-efficient manner.

24


Erwin

Data Literacy

Students engaged in analyzing data sets will broaden and deepen their
knowledge and skills in content disciplines, thinking more like the experts in
the discipline as they work in contexts that reinforce and reward expert and
applied thinking. These students are more likely to experience satisfaction
and even intellectual fulfillment when studying in the academic disciplines
while pursuing these problem-solution tasks. Real data can contribute to real
learning and true data literacy.

