FEATURE

20 Knowledge Quest

 

What Makes a Literacy?





WHY DATA
L I T E R AC Y
M AT T E R S
Kristin Fontichiaro
font@umich.edu
Jo Angela Oehrli
jooehrli@umich.edu

Volume 44, No. 5

 

May/June 2016 21



Introduction
From their first research project,
students notice numbers. From
how many toes a polar bear has to
the population of Azerbaijan to the
percentage of Americans who own
iPhones, student researchers sense
instinctively that numeric data is
a powerful way of communicating
information. Even though students
often believe numbers convey an air
of authority in their work, their lack
of critical awareness is undermining
their success.
As many states move forward with
adoption or adaptation of the
College, Career, and Civic Life
(C3) Framework for Social Studies
State Standards, Common Core
State Standards, and/or Next
Generation Science Standards,
students are expected to be fluent
with data: to collect and analyze it,
create figures and tables, integrate
quantitative information, and move
fluidly between text and visually
represented numerical information.
Despite these formal expectations,
students receive little guidance on
how to move nimbly between text
and numbers beyond what examples
they see in textbooks or instructions
for in-class controlled lab
experiments. There is a disconnect
between classwork and the data and
statistical literacy skills needed
beyond the classroom. Whether
researching cancer statistics or
the best car to buy, students don t
often have a strong sense of what
those numbers mean. Students
often believe that numbers are
objective, though data in the real
world is rarely so. In fact, visualized
data even from authoritative
sources can sometimes be anything
but. School librarians increasingly
recognize that students either make
poor decisions about the quality of
statistics, data, and visualizations,
or that they lack the ability to

22 Knowledge Quest

 

What Makes a Literacy?

comprehend these resources
altogether.
School librarians can play a
significant role in helping
students gain understanding of
real-world numbers, statistics,
charts, graphs, and visualizations.
Librarians are unique crossdisciplinary pollinators who can
fill the gaps between subject areas
and help students gain skill in
comprehending and critically
evaluating data at home, at school,
and in life. We collectively refer to
these skills as data literacy and define
data as:
1. Information represented
numerically via raw numbers,
percentages, percentiles,
averages (mean, median, mode),
etc.
2. Information that can be used
algorithmically to determine
compatibility (OKCupid),
fitness levels (Fitbit), personality
(BuzzFeed quizzes), etc.
3. Numerical information
rendered visually (charts, graphs,
coded maps, tables, etc.) to
aid in pattern-finding and
comprehension. (Fontichiaro
and Abilock 2015)
Michael Bowen and Anthony Bartley
wrote, “Data literacy is important
for your students [...] because data
are used to argue and persuade
people to, among other things, vote
for political agendas […] or lease a
car. An improved understanding
of data practices means that better
questions can be asked” (2014, ix)
and better decisions made.
To build students  capacity as
thoughtful, active citizens in this
brave new world, we must first build
our own data literacy capacity. Given
limited time and access to students,
we must distill and prioritize data

skills, building out our toolkits with
mini-lessons and high-leverage data
literacy rules of thumb that bridge
the gap between awareness and
action.

How Do You Eat an Elephant?
One Bite at a Time
Few librarians received formal
instruction in statistics. Anecdotal
evidence points to a profession
dominated by humanities and
social science majors with little
collegiate practice in data and
statistics. On our campus, no
school library candidates since
2010 have had STEM (science,
technology, engineering, math)
backgrounds, and we imagine
the situation is similar elsewhere.
Few library schools incorporate
data or statistical literacy into
information literacy courses, and
few school library programs require
coursework in research methods,
where statistical literacy would be a
core learning objective. If you are
among the few who are well-versed
in data and statistics, we salute you.
Everyone else, keep reading we
see a terrific opportunity ahead for
librarians.
Tackling self-study in data and
statistical literacy can be a challenge.
In our new IMLS-funded project
to develop data literacy as a subset
of information literacy skills, we
have concentrated on how students
read, comprehend, evaluate, and
synthesize data and not on how they
create and organize data via lab
experiments. In doing so, we have
identified six significant themes for
school librarians to consider.

One: Statistical Literacy
Statistics flood news articles,
Facebook feeds, and scholarly
journals. School librarians and
their students must critically “read,”
contextualize, and interpret raw



School librarians can play a significant role
in helping students gain understanding of
real‑world numbers, statistics, charts, graphs,
and visualizations. Librarians are unique
cross‑disciplinary pollinators who can fill the
gaps between subject areas and help students
gain skill in comprehending and critically evaluating
data at home, at school, and in life.

Volume 44, No. 5

 

May/June 2016 23



and synthesized data. Discerning
correlation from causation;
recognizing the difference in the
meaning of mean, median, and
mode; understanding what margin
of error signifies in polling data;
and recognizing potential biases
in collected data, among other
skills, are critical for reading
scholarly research, understanding
arguments in popular media,
and interpreting government
documents. For example,
MyFitnessPal released a list of the
ten healthiest and least healthy
states (MyFitnessPal Staff 2015). A
savvy librarian asks, “How did they
gather the data?” and discovers
that the list was determined based
only on MyFitnessPal users. She
then recognizes that those users
might not be representative of all
residents.

Two: Data Visualization
Having skills to create and comprehend mapped data, graphs, pie
charts, and emerging forms of
visualizations will help students
effectively navigate visually rich
information sets. At a session
at the 2015 Research Relevance
Conference, librarians shared
their concerns that the emotional
overtones (e.g., color, icons)
used in these visualizations have
powerful influence over students.
One critical question posed in the
conversation that our project will
address was, “Which comes first?
Learning how to make graphics? Or
how to interpret them?” Additionally, the need for data visualization
skills across library types was
evident at the 2015 American
Library Association Annual Conference, where approximately 150
librarians gathered for a two-part
data visualization session, the
conference s only session on data
literacy.

24 Knowledge Quest

 

What Makes a Literacy?

Three: Data in Argument
Our students can assemble
random bits of factual data.
However, it takes far more skill to
understand how data is used both
informationally and persuasively 
to support arguments in resources
students examine, and then
for students to create viable
arguments themselves. These
arguments could take the form of
statistics embedded as evidence in
a research paper, shared charts
and graphs with tweaked or nonstandardized elements, advertising,
or infographics.
Infographics have emerged in
many schools as a novel way for
students to represent what they
have learned, yet many school
librarians with whom we spoke
expressed dissatisfaction with
students  work, stating that it too
often contained disconnected facts
and lacked a cohesive argument.
Similarly, a 2013 survey indicated
that citizens in the UK overlooked
statistics that would correct their
misconceptions on topics like the
rates of teen pregnancy and crime
(Ipsos MORI 2013).

Four: Big Data and Citizen
Science
Recent media reports lament
society s “Big Data Problem”
(Kopytoff 2014; Pena
Gangadharan 2014; and Salmon
2014). More and more data is
being collected, often without
citizens  knowledge, via frequentshopper cards, step counters,
social media, and more. Some
data is life-saving, such as DIY
systems that help parents monitor
their children s Type 1 diabetes
by transferring insulin data
temporarily and anonymously
online (Nightscout Project 2015).
Careful human interpretation of
big data is required for positive
outcomes to be achieved.

One student-friendly entry point
for interacting with big data is
citizen science. Students should
recognize that projects like eBird
and the emerging PhotosynQ
invite the crowd-sourcing of data
for the greater good (monitoring
birds  locations and migration,
and tracking photosynthesis
levels in leaves, respectively) but
must incorporate mechanisms
to address data authenticity and
accuracy. However, students
must also realize that some
data-collection projects start out
with good intentions such as
the failed inBloom initiative to
passively monitor identifiable
student data and achievement for
decades but backfire by making
too much personal data vulnerable
to outside access. Microsoft
researcher danah boyd has called
for more understanding of data
and statistical literacy as tools to
navigate these issues (Pearle 2015;
Hardy 2012).

Five: Personal Data Management
From Google s personalized
search results to Facebook s
custom ads, students have daily
experiences often unbeknownst to
them captured as their clicks and
likes are converted into actionable
data. While students might like
seeing relevant ads or music
recommendations that match their
favorites, few know it is because
of the breadcrumb trail they leave
behind. Students may think the
website CNN.com is serving up
the news to them, but they are
usually unaware that as many as
fourteen bots are following their
actions and converting their clicks
into data, according to a recent
experiment conducted with Google
Chrome extension Ghostery, which
monitors webpages for beacons,
advertising, and click-counting
tools.



School librarians have long
taught digital citizenship and
the importance of being cautious
about personal information
shared online. As students use the
open Web for research, they need
to be aware that even if they do
not enter their names or phone
numbers online, information
about them their search habits,
their choices of which webpages to
visit may be attaching themselves
to their Internet cookies or Google
account. Librarians must extend
their credibility lessons to help
students recognize that today s
online content creators and
social networks are engaged in a
balancing act between maximizing
advertising revenues and delivering
quality content. This nuanced
understanding goes beyond moreobvious credibility markers such as
relevance, authorship, or currency
into a recognition that information
online is a market-driven
economy and editorial choices may
be influenced accordingly.

Librarians must extend their credibility lessons
to help students recognize that today s
online content creators and social
networks are engaged in a balancing
act between maximizing advertising
revenues and delivering quality content.
This nuanced understanding goes beyond
more-obvious credibility markers such as
relevance, authorship, or currency into a
recognition that information online is a marketdriven economy and editorial choices may
be influenced accordingly.

Six: Ethical Data Use
Data is not inherently good or
bad, but it can be framed, edited,
manipulated, or otherwise
modified for unethical purposes
(such as swaying voters by citing a
small or outdated study) or simply
to confuse (Is “take an additional
25% off our half-off prices” the
same as 75% off?). Just as students
need practice in rhetoric and
information literacy, students
also need practice learning to
create and evaluate data-related
arguments and information. This
may seem like a minor extension of

Volume 44, No. 5

 

May/June 2016 25



existing practice. We already tell
our students to use information
accurately and to cite sources. Is
using data accurately and citing
it any different? We believe that
there is a difference because of
students  inherent belief that
numbers are infallible. We must
train our brains and theirs to
remember to stop and analyze
numerical arguments, not
just text-based ones. Ethical
informational use is more than
merely citing sources. In fact, we
can leverage discussions about
ethical use of personal data 
something of deep personal
value to ground discussions
of citation, an abstract concept
the value of which can be more
difficult for teens to grasp.

Librarian Action Steps
For us, data literacy has been an
acquired taste, and we suspect the
same may be true for you. Kristin s
interest grew from Debbie
Abilock s gentle but persistent
prodding that the big data
movement was something to watch.
At the University of Michigan
Library, Angie currently chairs
the data information literacy task
force, which focuses on exploring
existing data literacy teaching
strategies as well as creating new
teaching practices in this area.
She has been working for several
years on initiatives to develop her
colleagues  understanding of data
literacy. We have found these books
and resources to be helpful:

Kristin Fontichiaro is coprincipal investigator
for the Supporting Librarians in Adding Data Literacy
Skills to Information Literacy Instruction project,
funded by the Institute of Museum and Library Services, and a clinical assistant professor at the University
of Michigan School of Information in Ann Arbor. A member of AASL, she
serves on ALA s Book Links advisory board. She was awarded the 2015
Joan Durrance Community Engagement Award and the 2014 Excellence in
Instruction Award from the University of Michigan School of Information.
Booklist named her Makers as Innovators series one of the 2014 Top
Ten Series Nonfiction (author and series editor). She recently edited the ebook essay collection Information Literacy, or How I Learned to
Stop Worrying and Love Library Instruction <www.smashwords.
com/books/view/601117>. She coauthored the chapter “Digital Badges:
Purposeful Design in Professional Learning Outcomes for K 12 Educators”
in Foundations of Digital Badges and Micro-Credentials:
Demonstrating and Recognizing Knowledge and Competencies (Springer in press). She also authored the children s books Hacking
Fashion: Denim, Hacking Fashion: Fleece, Hacking Fashion: T-Shirts, Design Thinking, Watch It! Researching with
Videos, and Review It! Helping Peers Create Their Best Work
(Cherry Lake Publishing). She blogs at <http://bit.ly/fontblog>.

26 Knowledge Quest

 

What Makes a Literacy?

• Abilock, Debbie, and Connie
Williams. 2014. “Recipe for an
Infographic.” Knowledge Quest 43
(2): 46 55.
In-depth guidance on constructing
argument-rich infographics.
• Best, Joel. 2013. Stat-Spotting:
A Field Guide to Identifying Dubious
Data, updated and expanded
ed. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Uses friendly, easy-to-read language to
provide rules of thumb to keep in mind
while reading for pleasure or scholarship.
• Fontichiaro, Kristin. 2014.
Creating and Understanding Infographics.
Ann Arbor, MI: Cherry Lake.
A child-friendly overview of infographic
comprehension and construction.

Jo Angela (Angie) Oehrli is coprincipal
investigator for the Supporting Librarians in
Adding Data Literacy Skills to Information
Literacy Instruction project. A former teacher in
an alternative high school and in middle schools,
Angie works as an instructional librarian and has coauthored a chapter
on the University of Michigan (U-M) librarians  data education
professional development project for The New Information
Literacy Instruction (Rowman and Littlefield 2015). At U-M she
collaborates on instructional strategies with diverse groups, including
the campus Women in Science and Engineering Residence Program.
As the former chair of the University of Michigan Library Instructor
College, she led the professional development efforts for U-M librarians
in the area of instruction. She co-created the Michigan Instruction
Exchange, a low-cost, statewide conference for instruction librarians.
She is an adjunct lecturer in the University of Michigan School of
Information, focusing on instructional practices for librarians and
information professionals, and teaches both basic and advanced digital
research methods courses for the U-M College of Literature, Sciences,
and the Arts. She has also chaired the Top Twenty Committee for ALA s
Library Instruction Round Table and currently serves on the LOEX
Advisory Council.



• Hoelter, Lynette. 2014.
“Data, Data Everywhere
and Not a Number to
Teach.” <www.youtube.com/
watch?v=N1RKVP9O9_w>
(accessed December 15, 2015).
A welcoming overview of data and
statistics by an advisor to our project.
• Wheelan, Charles J. 2013. Naked
Statistics: Stripping the Dread from the
Data. New York: Norton.
Provides user-friendly context for
understanding statistics in the real world.
Definitely not a stats class textbook!
• Yau, Nathan. 2013. Data Points:
Visualization That Means Something.
Indianapolis: Wiley.
A superb introduction to data
visualization analysis and construction.
Remarkably user-friendly. Yau also
publishes the flowingdata.com blog.

Conclusion
Data is more than charts, graphs,
and spreadsheets. It is being used in
powerful, sometimes nearly invisible,
ways to shape how we view the world
and our role within it. In a world
where everyone is an author online,
data use is at the crux of teens  daily
lives. Never has there been a more
critical time to declare data as an
essential literacy for students. Is it
ethical for someone s social media
profile to be used as evidence against
them? Should someone s Fitbit data
be used to contradict her testimony?
It already has been (Hambright 2015).
Should algorithms predicting future
crimes be used to sentence someone
now? They already are (Barry-Jester,
Casselman, and Goldstein 2015).
Should neighborhood data be used to
determine mortgage eligibility and

rates, despite the legal ban on “redlining”? It already is (Knott 2015).
Do schools and libraries have a
responsibility to help future generations figure this out? Our answer is
that we unequivocally do.
These are the questions that affect
all of our students. As part of our
IMLS-funded grant, we will be publishing professional development
materials for school librarians and
other educators, as well as conducting virtual conferences in summer
2016 and 2017, focusing first on
statistical literacy, data in argument,
and data visualization, with the
remaining themes scheduled for
development in the final year. We
invite you to view our progress and
join our e-mail notification list at
<http://dataliteracy.si.umich.edu>.

