The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
www.emeraldinsight.com/0022-0418.htm

Data literacy: in search of
a name and identity

Data literacy

Tibor Koltay
Department of Information and Library Studies, Szent István University,
Jászberény, Hungary
Abstract
Purpose   The role of data literacy is discussed in the light of such activities as data a quality, data
management, data curation, and data citation. The differing terms and their relationship to the most
important literacies are examined. The paper aims to discuss these issues.
Design/methodology/approach   By stressing the importance of data literacy in fulfilling the
mission of the contemporary academic library, the paper centres on information literacy, while
the characteristics of other relevant literacies are also examined. The content of data literacy education
is explained in the context of data-related activities.
Findings   It can be concluded that there is a need for data literacy and it is advantageous to have
a unified terminology. Data literacy can be offered both to researchers, who need to become data
literate science workers and have the goal to educate data management professionals. Several lists of
competencies contain important skills and abilities, many of them indicating the close relationship
between data literacy and information literacy. It is vital to take a critical stance on hopes and fears,
related to the promises of widespread ability of (big) data.
Originality/value   The paper intends to be an add-on to the body of knowledge about information
literacy and other literacies in the light of research data and data literacy.
Keywords Research, Data, Information literacy, Academic libraries
Paper type Viewpoint

Introduction
The increased interest in data characterizes not only the highly instrumented scientific
and engineering research, but the social sciences and the humanities, as well. The vast
amounts of data allow researchers to ask new questions in new ways, and   in the same
time   also pose a wide range of concerns for access, management, and preservation
(Borgman et al., 2011). Data sharing is also an issue. To make data accessible, we need
to develop appropriate technical and organizational infrastructures for storage and
retrieval. Incentives and policies for researchers to share data are also indispensable
(Kowalczyk and Shankar, 2011) and data literacy, which carries the potential of
motivation, is one of the essential elements of this infrastructure.
Al in all, digital research data is a hot topic today. The professional literature of the
2010s clearly shows a tide in appearance of articles on digital research data issues.
For instance, the ACRL Research Planning and Review Committee (ACRL, 2012;
ACRL, 2014) identified data curation (in a wide sense) as one of the top ten trends in
academic libraries for both 2012 and 2014.
This paper describes the importance of data-related issues and activities in detail.
We are also going to discuss, what role research data (including big data) plays today,
then data literacy will be defined and its relationship to information literacy, academic
literacy and other literacies will be explained. The content of data literacy education
will also be analyzed.
Taking the recent tidal wave of interest in data-related issues, when discussing data
literacy, we will rely mainly on literature from the 2010s.

401
Received 10 February 2014
Revised 21 June 2014
Accepted 2 July 2014

Journal of Documentation
Vol. 71 No. 2, 2015
pp. 401-415
© Emerald Group Publishing Limited
0022-0418
DOI 10.1108/JD-02-2014-0026

JDOC
71,2

402

Before trying to solve this naming problem and finding the proper identity of data
literacy, we have to take a quick look at the role that the library can and should play in
coping with the phenomenon of the “data deluge”, as it is often called (Borgman, 2012;
Little, 2012).
Research data and the library
In the same way as the library has traditionally facilitated access to documents, now
information professionals could facilitate access to data, even though data do not
necessarily fit into the same, document formats that libraries used to offer (Stuart, 2011).
It is clear namely now that technology-driven research, known as eResearch, generates
large quantities of data. However, the lack of tools, infrastructure, standardized processes
and properly skilled personnel may impede the continued development of e-research
(Carlson et al., 2011).
No doubt, if libraries want to ensure that they remain relevant, services related to
research data offer an opportunity to put the expertise of information professionals
to good use (Christensen-Dalsgaard et al., 2012). Realizing this, the Association of
Research Libraries declared in 2012 that academic libraries are in a favourable position
to help researchers to meet the challenges of a data-driven research paradigm because
libraries and information professionals:
•

have experience and skills in fostering cross-departmental, cross-campus, etc.
communication and collaboration, required for effective research data management;

•

are familiar with the research data needs of researchers and have been among the
supporters of innovative publishing models, including open access publishing;
and

•

are increasingly providing data consultation services and information
professionals are already involved in acquiring necessary abilities to manage
data (Hswe and Holt, 2012).

The fields of involvement of academic libraries in providing research data services
address the full data lifecycle, including planning, curation, and metadata creation
and conversion (Tenopir et al., 2011) as well as playing the critical role as data quality
hubs on campus, by providing data quality auditing and verification services for the
research communities (Giarlo, 2013).
The Association of European Research Libraries published recommendations for
libraries to get started with research data management support that involves   among
others   the development of metadata and data standards, creating data librarian
(data specialists) posts, providing services for storage, discovery and permanent access
and promoting data citation (Christensen-Dalsgaard et al., 2012). Mooney and Silver
(2011, p. 480) state that librarians “will not only need to learn how to apply traditional
techniques of reference, instruction, and collection management to the unique format
of data, but also how to raise awareness of this new service to the wider academic
community”.
According to Calzada Prado and Marzal (2013), academic libraries can have different
responses to eScience (eResearch) and the growing need to use research data. They can
hire specialized staff (data librarians or data specialists) or further data management
and analysis training for (generally reference) librarians. Intensifying the collection
of data sources and providing access to them including the participation in the

development of institutional data repositories is another option. Last, but not least they
can incorporate data literacy in their instructional programs and services. Data literacy
also appears in the predictions about future directions for academic libraries in the
Library 2.0 world (Merrill, 2011).
Information professionals have begun to understand these needs. For instance, an
online survey of 140 libraries in Australia, New Zealand, Ireland, and the UK identified
needs in guidance in the handling and management of unpublished research data,
including data literacy education (Corrall et al., 2013).
In search of a name and identity
We must search for a name because the literature shows that differing concepts and terms
are used. Besides data literacy there is data information literacy (Carlson et al., 2011),
science data literacy (Qin and D Ignazio, 2010), and research data literacy (Schneider, 2013).
In our opinion, terminology should be unified around the concept and term of data
literacy. We can adopt the definition of Calzada Prado and Marzal (2013), according to
whom data literacy enables individuals to access, interpret, critically assess, manage,
handle and ethically use data. Managing, figuring in this definition comprises
preservation and curation. We can supplement the above with the viewpoint of
Mandinach and Gummer (2013, p. 30), who define data literacy as “the ability to
understand and use data effectively to inform decisions”. They add that it is a specific
skill set and knowledge base that enables us to transform data into information and
ultimately into actionable knowledge.
When speaking about the issue of finding the proper name, it seems to be helpful to
look at the difficulties experienced in the naming practices of information literacy.
As Hunt (2004) explains, there may be no agreement on the precise definition of
information literacy. Nonetheless, most people use the term information literacy rather
than library instruction or information fluency. However, if we do not use the same
language, it will be difficult to convince our stakeholders about the importance of
information literacy education. In the case of data literacy we may experience the same.
Obviously, speaking about data literacy is impossible without delineating the
concept of literacy. Without aiming and exhaustive discussion (done to a substantial
extent by Bawden, 2001), we can affirm that while literacy and its counterpart, illiteracy
were once well understood and well defined (Buschman, 2009), the growing role of
digital technologies changed their meaning. It meant originally being knowledgeable
with the body of writing of aesthetic merit, while now it often signifies being able to
cope with the socio-technological changes and challenges brought by the convergence
between media, telecommunication, information and communication technologies
(Livingstone et al., 2008).
Finding the identity of data literacy is based to a certain extent on its raison d'être.
The perhaps most important objective is to exercise healthy criticism. We witness
namely a widespread belief that the existence and access to research data, in particular
to big data offers a higher form of intelligence and knowledge. There is an aura of truth,
objectivity, and accuracy around it, as well. While big data is seen as a solution to many
burning questions, it is regarded by many as a tool that threatens privacy, decreases
civil freedoms, ushering increased state, and corporate control. The shifts to be
expected of big data are probably more subtle than these, even though we cannot see
this clearly among our current hopes and fears (Boyd and Crawford, 2012). This leads
to the conclusion that one of the most important goals of data literacy education should
be to foster critical thinking that keeps us away form the pitfalls of being overly

Data literacy

403

JDOC
71,2

404

optimistic or unduly pessimistic, behaving in an excessively critical or uncritical way.
In any case, critical assessment of data includes giving emphasis to the version
of the given data set, the person responsible for it (ACRL, 2013). It also may involve
understanding what data mean, including how to read graphs and charts
appropriately, draw correct conclusions from data, and recognize when data is
being used in misleading or inappropriate ways (Carlson et al., 2011).
The content of data literacy education
No doubt, data literacy s learning outcomes need to be codified and (when acquired)
best practices for data literacy programs have to be articulated (Hunt, 2004).
Ascertaining these outcomes is the continuation of our efforts to delineate data literacy
beyond a short definition. Several authors list the needed competencies, as a rule, using
the words skills and abilities interchangeably and synonymously.
It seems to be unquestionable that an important characteristic of data literacy is the
emphasis on the creation of data. Even though both Carlson et al. (2011) and Schneider
(2013) use different terms (data information literacy and research data literacy,
respectively) instead of data literacy, they stress the necessity to accommodate not only
the data consumer s viewpoint, but the data producer s, as well.
It would be rather self-explanatory to take granted that different ways of using data
is an important constituent of data literacy. This point of view gets emphasis, when we
see that an examination of data literacy among teachers by Jacobs et al. (2009) shows
that they define data as information that allows them to form opinions and make
judgments, adding that data use requires sophisticated professional knowledge and
ongoing attention to multiple sources of data ( Jacobs et al., 2009). This latter
characteristic is underlined in regard to the preparation of educators (Mandinach and
Gummer, 2013) and the most suitable one to be generalized for a use in other fields.
Data literacy education is not only a relatively new field for libraries, but it is one that
cuts across disciplinary boundaries and across the traditional structures of academic
library organizations. One sign of this is that humanities and social science scholars are in
the process of becoming a new constituency for data literacy education (ACRL, 2013).
Data literacy education can have a dual purpose. One is rather self-explanatory, i.e. to
achieve that students and researchers become data literate science workers. The other goal
is to educate data management professionals (Qin and D Ignazio, 2010; Schneider, 2013).
In regard to the former, Haendel et al. (2012) speak about creating a culture of semantic
scientists, stating that education in data literacy and information literacy should
accompany scientific training to establish a new cultural standard, especially because
researchers often do not realize that their own scholarly communications constitute a
primary source of data. Digital humanities researchers may be discerned as a special
subset of this group, because most digital humanities projects heavily rely on the
interpretation of data and the field is struggling to maintain a healthy balance between
the traditions and the ideals of humanistic endeavour, inherited from of long-established
print scholarship and the effects of a growing digital infrastructure (Dalbello, 2011;
Warwick, 2004). The move from text analysis to data mining and machine learning
(Kirschenbaum, 2007) shows this. The idea of distant reading also seems to be influential.
It is defined by Moretti (2005) as using graphs, maps, and trees instead of reading concrete,
individual works, applying deliberate reduction and abstraction and concentrating on
fewer elements that will allow us find sharper sense of their overall interconnection.
It is often difficult to separate data-related skills needed to become a successful
researcher and to work as a data specialist first of all because part of these skills

and abilities frequently overlap each other. A list of the fields, where data literacy
competencies can be used, clearly shows this:
•

discovery and acquisition of data;

•

data management;

•

data conversion and interoperability (dealing with the risks and potential loss or
corruption of information caused by changing data formats);

•

metadata;

•

data curation and re-use;

•

data preservation;

•

data analysis;

•

data visualization; and

•

ethics, including citation of data (Carlson et al., 2011; RIN, 2011).

Data literacy needs to take into consideration the framework of future work skills and
abilities, outlined by Davies et al. (2011). One of these abilities is the one to translate
vast amounts of data into abstract concepts, as well as to understand data-based
reasoning. This may lead to a situation, when we will start seeing almost everything
that we come into contact, through the lens of data, and will regard it as computational,
programmable.
Calzada Prado and Marzal (2013) emphasize the importance of knowing how to
select and synthesize data and combine them with other information sources and prior
knowledge. They also enumerate the following abilities:
•

to identify the context in which data is produced and reused (data lifecycle);

•

to recognize source data value, types and formats;

•

to determine when data is needed;

•

to access data sources appropriate to the information needed;

•

to critically assess data and their sources;

•

to determine and use suitable research methods;

•

to handle and analyze data;

•

to present quantitative information (specific data, tables, graphs, in reports and
similar);

•

to apply results to learning, decision making or problem-solving; and

•

to plan, organize and self-assess throughout the process.

It is not by accident that context is mentioned in the above list in the first place. Context
is utterly important. Dissociation of data from its context and the loss of context make
reuse difficult, or impossible (Schneider, 2013).
From this list, we can single out four abilities as they practically repeat well-known
abilities of information literacy, showing the close relationship between data literacy
and information literacy. These are determining when data is needed, accessing
sources appropriate to the information need, critically assessing data and their
sources and applying results to learning, decision making or problem solving.

Data literacy

405

JDOC
71,2

406

Accentuating data-driven decision making in education, Mandinach and Gummer
(2013) set up a list of skills. They name knowing how to identify, collect, organize,
analyze, summarize, and prioritize data. The last two skills are especially worth of
attention as they the ones that do not appear in other lists. According to Mandinach
and Gummer (2013), developing hypotheses, identifying problems, interpreting the data,
and determining, planning, implementing, as well as monitoring courses of action also
pertain to required skills and add the need for tailoring data literacy to the specific uses.
From the content of a series of instructional session on of socioeconomic data,
described by Wong (2010), we can single out three aspects. One of them is exploring
data evaluation and use. The other one is guiding students in understanding
data-collection methods and dissemination channels. Introducing students to the rich
varieties of data fulfilling different information needs should also be emphasized.
Data literate graduate students and researchers have to be familiar with some of the
questions that data curation poses:
•

Who owns the data?

•

What requirements are imposed by others (e.g. funding agencies or publishers)?

•

Which data should be retained?

•

For how long should data be maintained?

•

How should digital data be preserved?

•

Are there ethical considerations?

•

What sort of risk management is needed for research data?

•

How are data accessed?

•

How open should the data be?

•

What alternatives to local data management exist? (Erway, 2013).

The need for reviewing data periodically is also worth of attention as it forms the basis
of responsible decisions about disposal of “unnecessary” data, and preventing
hardware or software obsolescence (Pryor, 2012).
A data literate researcher does not need to be a data curator. However, being
familiar with the competencies of the curators and the fields, where the competencies,
listed below, are of good use helps in developing data literacy:
•

the ability to collaborate and work in teams;

•

familiarity with scientific data sources;

•

familiarity with quantitative research methods; and

•

knowledge of general metadata standards (Si et al., 2013).

From the fields, where these and other competencies can be used the following ones can
be singled out:
•

the data structure of different digital objects;

•

the ways to assess the digital objects” authenticity, integrity and accuracy over time;

•

storage and preservation policies, procedures and practices; and

•

the risks of information loss or corruption of digital entities (Madrid, 2013).

Data-literate persons must be also aware of the limitations of computational thinking,
mentioned earlier. This requires that they understand the limitations of data and
remain able to act in the absence of data (Davies et al., 2011).
Data literacy should include answers to the question about openness, asked above.
It has to include the notion of open data, which has been advocated by a number of
researchers in order to make science more open and accountable (Stuart, 2011).
While doing this, we have to be aware of the legitimate boundaries of openness set
by commercial interest, the protection of privacy, safety and security (The Royal
Society, 2012).
Data quality is a driving force of data literacy (Carlson et al., 2011; Madrid, 2013).
It is determined by multiple factors. The first one is trust that depends on subjective
judgments on authenticity, acceptability, or applicability of the data. Trust is also
influenced by the given subject discipline, the reputation of those responsible for the
creation of the data, and the biases of the persons who are evaluating it. The next factor
is authenticity, which measures the extent to which the data is judged to represent the
proper ways of conducting scientific research, including the reliability of the instruments
used to gather the data, the soundness of underlying theoretical frameworks, the
completeness, accuracy, and validity of the data. In order to evaluate authenticity,
the data must be understandable. The condition for the evaluation of understandability
of data is the presence of sufficient context in the form of documentation and metadata,
and it requires the data be usable (Giarlo, 2013). If we want data to be usable, it has to
be discoverable and accessible; and be in a usable file format. The individuals judging
data quality need to have at their disposal an appropriate tool to access the data; which
has to show sufficient integrity to be rendered. Integrity of data assumes that the data
can be proven to be identical, at the bit level, to some previously accepted or verified
state. Data integrity is required for usability, understandability and authenticity, thus it
influences overall quality (Giarlo, 2013). Trust is related to cognitive authority, which
has two levels. At an operational level, cognitive authority is the extent to which users
think that they can trust the information. On a more general level, cognitive authority
refers to “influences that a user would recognize as proper because the information
therein is thought to be credible and worthy of belief” (Rieh, 2002, p. 146).
We already mentioned an essential aspect of data literacy. It is the profound
understanding of the big data phenomenon, especially acknowledging that the decisive
factor is not the quantity of data, but the capacity to search, aggregate, and cross-reference
large data sets by virtue of the processing power of computers and networks. Data literate
researchers and information professionals also have to know that data is no longer an
exclusive issue for the sciences, but it is present in the social sciences, the humanities, arts
and culture, as well (Boyd and Crawford, 2012).
It is vital not to forget about data citation, which allows the identification, retrieval,
replication, and verification of data underlying published studies. Standardized forms
of data citation could provide a motivation for researchers to share and publish their
data, thus it has the potential to become a tool of reward and acknowledgment for them
(Mooney and Newton, 2012). Unfortunately, despite numerous initiatives, at the moment,
there is no standardization and consistency in data citation.
As service providers, data librarians should be acquainted with quantitative
research methods, which enable them to process and analyze research data. To be able
to provide support for researchers, they have to possess an extensive understanding of
scientific data sources, which will enable them to recommending comprehensive and
reliable data sources (Si et al., 2013).

Data literacy

407

JDOC
71,2

408

The summary of employers  requirements set against scientific data specialists
(data librarians) by Si et al. (2013) shows high frequency of offering reference services
for scientific research and data curation is regarded as one of the core duties of
scientific data specialists, stating that in order to foster the data literacy of users,
libraries require the instruction and training to users, including helping them
understand the significance of scientific data curation and master the usage of various
tools for data processing, data analysis and data statistics.
Data literacy and other literacies
The work of today s researcher mobilizes competencies on three levels:
•

conceptual competencies that include among others innovative thinking, problem
solving and critical thinking;

•

human competencies, like social networking skills, self-management and
cross-cultural interaction skills; and

•

practical competencies that include media literacy and information literacy
(Lee, 2013).

The perhaps best known form of practical competencies is information literacy.
Education to information literacy emphasizes critical thinking and the necessity to
recognize message quality. It has strong positions among literacies despite some
(well founded) scepticism, highlighting the fact that this concept and especially the lack
of information literacy has always seemed to be of more importance to academic
librarians than to any other players in the information and education arena (Bawden
and Robinson, 2009).
A broader interpretation of information literacy recognizes that the concept of
information includes research data (RIN, 2011). Many writings, related to data literacy
provide evidence of this. We already mentioned some. Besides of these, Fosmire and
Miller (2008) speak about information literacy in the data world. Even though without
referring to data literacy, Wang (2013) mentions that reference librarians frequently
conduct information literacy sessions that educate the users about the existing data
resources for their specific study areas. Calzada Prado and Marzal (2013) state that
information literacy and data literacy form part of a scientific-investigative educational
continuum, a gradual process of education that begins in school, is perfected and
becomes specialized in higher education and becomes part of lifelong learning. In this
later quality it is close to scientific literacy, which we will address shortly later.
Andretta et al. (2008) identified presenting, evaluating and interpreting qualitative
and quantitative data as a learning outcome of information literacy. According to Hunt
(2004), data literacy education should borrow heavily from information literacy
education, even though the data literacy field is more fragmented than the domain
of information literacy. Schneider (2013) also defines data literacy as a component
of information literacy.
Si et al., (2013) state that data-related services should be supported by professionals
with both excellent scientific literacy and information literacy skills.
Adapting the ACRL information literacy competency standards for higher
education (ACRL, 2000) to data information literacy, as done by Carlson et al. (2011),
offers an interesting perspective. Obviously, we know that the ACRL standards have
been criticized for representing a narrow and marginalized view of information literacy
(Špiranec and Banek Zorica, 2010; Nazari and Webber, 2012). On the other hand the

standards not only acknowledge the value of research data, but include a number of
explicit references to them (Calzada Prado and Marzal, 2013, Magnuson, 2013).
Standard Three is especially relevant in this regard as it directs attention to evaluating
information critically. If we translate this universal principle to data, we see that data
information literate students are required not only to determine when and how to share
data, but also document their own sources of data. This acquires significance in the
light of the difficulty of documenting data, which is a fact that appeared in our writing
several times. The reason for this is fairly simple. Critical examination of some
information or data is practically impossible if we cannot rely on its documented
feature, e.g. we cannot verify its provenance. Let us add that   as reflected by the
definition, indicated above   it is an imperative for data literacy to be built on a critical
approach towards data (Carlson et al., 2011).
In a typical information literacy course we can assume the students know how to
read, use a web browser and word processor. Data-related skills and abilities, even
relatively simple ones, are not always so obviously present (Hunt, 2004). Despite of this,
data literacy education could rely on the experiences of the writing across the
curriculum movement, which presented a model since the 1970s for encouraging
collaboration between faculty and librarians in developing composition and critical
thinking skills (Bronshteyn and Baladad, 2006). It can provide information literacy with
ways to resolve the increasingly irrelevant theory-practice divide as it places the
student at the centre of the educational process (Elmborg, 2003).
Unfortunately, it would be utterly naïve presume that researchers easily (and readily)
accept the need for acquiring data literacy skills. There is substantial evidence that the
people in general as well as researchers hold themselves competent and skilful in dealing
with information (Nicholas et al., 2008). Data is probably not different in researchers 
perception. Even more, they may feel more confident with it.
The relationship between data literacy and academic literacy has many faces.
The latter has a grammatical dimension that information literate students must be
taught and researchers must master. It involves the comprehension of the entire system
of thinking, values, cultural identity and information flows of academia, which results
in the ability to read, interpret, and produce texts valued in academia (Elmborg, 2006).
Academic literacy is more closely associated with formal learning, than data literacy.
This is especially true in higher education. Data literacy, affects the undergraduate
student population to a lesser degree than academic literacy. Instead, data literacy has
a true lifelong-learning character. The reason for this is in the fact that researchers in
the past did not have to possess many of the data-related skills, at least not the ones
related to data sharing and needed for citing data. In addition to this, the majority of the
researchers have to acquire data literacy in the workplace, up to the point, when it
becomes a standard literacy in graduate and doctoral education.
In his paper, Weideman (2003) enumerates some requirements set against academic
literacy. Interpreting and using metaphors and idioms, or word play, rely mainly on
linguistic abilities. The ability to understand academic vocabulary is different. It must
be acquired together with the system of concepts and ways of thinking, characterizing
a particular discipline or academia in general. Being aware of the logical development
of an academic text is similarly two-faced. If we substitute data for information, we can
identify a number of requirements that are relevant for data literacy. Sensitivity for
meaning and for the intended audience, interpreting, using and producing information
presented in graphic or visual format, as well as making distinctions between essential
and non-essential information, fact and opinion, propositions and arguments; distinguishing

Data literacy

409

JDOC
71,2

410

between cause and effect are examples of this. The requirement to classify, categorize
and handle data and to do simple numerical estimations and computations are more
directly connected to data literacy.
A number of other literacies can be mentioned and according to the type of connection
to data literacy, there seem to be three slightly different types of these literacies.
The first type is close to data literacy by its topic. Statistical literacy pertains to this
group. Schield (2004) is of the opinion that information literacy, statistical literacy and
data literacy are tied together by a common set of problems and a similar level of
approach. All three are more general than specific, they each involve interdisciplinary
study and they deal with fundamentals. Besides of this, data literacy sets the overall
context for evaluating the sources of data and is needed to access, manipulate and
summarize the data, while statistical literacy guides that process.
Visual literacy is also often mentioned in relationship with data literacy because of
the similarity between their topics. The ACRL Visual Literacy Competency Standards
for Higher Education (ACRL, 2011) state the following:
Visual literacy is a set of abilities that enables an individual to effectively find, interpret,
evaluate, use, and create images and visual media. Visual literacy skills equip a learner to
understand and analyze the contextual, cultural, ethical, aesthetic, intellectual, and technical
components involved in the production and use of visual materials. A visually literate
individual is both a critical consumer of visual media and a competent contributor to a body of
shared knowledge and culture.

Despite topical similarities, the most important points of this definition are the ones
that show its relationship to information literacy and data literacy that can be called
methodological. If we analyze it from this viewpoint, we can clearly see that critical
approach remains prime interest. It is also reassuring and in accordance with modern
approaches to information literacy that both consuming and producing receive
emphasis. This is not different in relation to data literacy, either.
Data literacy is also connected to scientific literacy, which comprises methods,
approaches, attitudes and skills, related to thinking scientifically and doing scientific
research (National Academy of Sciences, 1996). This implies that the circle of potentially
scientifically literate persons may be wide, even if only a small number of graduate
students become scientists. Scientific literacy is not equivalent to teaching and
learning sciences in public education. It is rather a complex set of knowledge of
methods, approaches, attitudes and skills, related to a set of questions on how to do
scientific research (Karvalics, 2013). The dominant similarity here is very much in
the actors, i.e. in those persons, who need this literacy. Its connection to academic
literacy, which was already mentioned as a main “neighbouring” literacy is almost
self-explanatory.
Data literacy shares some distinguishing features with media literacy, especially in
regard to the use and reuse of content in ways not imagined by the content creator
(ACRL, 2013). Mentioning media literacy has two reasons. First, we know that there is
a convergence among literacies caused by the (already mentioned) convergence
between different forms of media and information and communication technologies
(Livingstone et al., 2008). This provides a reason, why media literacy has relevance for
a wide array of media, including research data. Second, we are aware of the fact that
the capacity and interest in data-related issues is to a substantial extent result of the
appearance of the Web 2.0. In this environment, users and their interests are represented
in mediated spaces, which also serve as an environment to activate engagement with

others ( Jarrett, 2008). This mediated nature influences data indirectly and to a lesser
extent. Nonetheless, it requires that we approach data literacy not only as a
manifestation of information literacy, but look at it through the lens of media literacy.
Media literacy comes into the picture as a relevant “general literacy”. Obviously,
information literacy can be labelled as a general one. The difference here is in the
closeness of relationship between the two literacies, i.e. the influence of information
literacy on data literacy is much more decisive than the one of media literacy.
Regarding “general literacies”, digital literacy cannot be bypassed, either. As Qin
and D Ignazio (2010) put it, information literacy mobilizes the abilities and skills, related
to finding, retrieving, analyzing, and using information. The same object, i.e.
information, is aimed by digital literacy, which not only accentuates creating it (as we
already mentioned this), but emphasizes the use of digital technology. When we
underlined the importance of the data producer s viewpoint, we connected data literacy
to the competences of digital literacy, which include “being comfortable with
publishing and communicating information” (Bawden, 2008, p. 20).
Last, but not least, in virtue of its overarching nature, metaliteracy has to be
mentioned. All the above literacies fit well into its framework, which provides the
foundation for media literacy, digital literacy and other literacies, and emphasizes
content (Mackey and Jacobson, 2011). With this the boundaries between information in
information literacy from data in data literacy become blurred. In fact they never have
been rigid, as information literacy has always been interested in the proper understanding
and use of data that is converted into information (Schneider, 2013).
Conclusion
Data literacy is an evolving concept and it is in the need of using unified terminology.
Data literacy education is an emerging field, which has a dual nature, i.e. its target
audience is both potential data literate researchers and data specialists. The latter may
either educate researchers to data literacy or fulfil different supporting functions in
data-related research processes. Data literacy is akin to information literacy, while
sharing a number of features with several other literacies. Among its features,
borrowed from information literacy we find another duality. To be able to teach data
literacy or be involved in any data-related research requires information professional to
be data-literate themselves.
The success of data literacy will depend on how well we train information professional
and make faculty and administrators understand why data literacy is imperative (Hunt,
2004). Re-skilling library staff is also utterly important in this process, as only a few
libraries are able to hire new, specialized professionals (Christensen-Dalsgaard et al., 2012).
Even though the spectrum of data-related activities is broad, information professionals
need to be involved in them, centering on data citation and data literacy, emphasizing the
educational nature and close relationship to information literacy and other relevant
literacies of the latter.
