REVIEWS/ESSAYS

A Systemic View of Implementing Data Literacy in Educator
Preparation
Ellen B. Mandinach1 and Edith S. Gummer2

Data-driven decision making has become increasingly important in education. Policymakers require educators to use
data to inform practice. Although the policy emphasis is growing, what has not increased is attention to building human
capacity around data use. Educators need to gain data literacy skills to inform practice. Although some professional
development opportunities exist for current educators, fewer formal courses and opportunities for data literacy development in schools of education have been developed and implemented. This article explores issues around the growing
need for data-driven decision making in programs in schools of education. The issues are complex and the actors needed
to bring about change are multiple. A systems perspective to explore course and programmatic implementation is presented.

Keywords: decision making; teacher knowledge; teacher education and development; policy analysis

T

he scope and nature of data available to educators is growing at an increasing rate. Parallel to this growth in data is
the awareness that all educators must understand how to
use tangible evidence to inform their decisions rather than use
anecdotes, intuitions, or personal preferences. Helping educators to become data literate is not as simple as it may seem.
Training the existing cohort of educators currently out in
schools is an expensive and daunting enterprise. Preparing preservice candidates may be even more complicated as multiple
stakeholders seek to influence that preparation. This article
takes a systemic perspective to examine what schools of education, professional credentialing organizations, state departments of education and their licensing agencies, and professional
development providers can do to prepare and train the nation s
educators to use data effectively to make instructional, administrative, policy, and other decisions. The article first provides
some context and trends around data literacy, including supportive technologies, standards, and accreditation. It then
describes knowledge around the development of data literacy,
including an exploration of requisite skills and knowledge, current practices in schools of education, and the roles of various
stakeholder groups. The article then explores the systemic
nature of the components that can contribute to the development of data literacy, noting gaps in research and postulating a
framework to move the field forward.

What Is Data Literacy?
The field is now working on a common definition of data literacy
(Mandinach & Gummer, 2012a). In this article, we broadly

define data literacy as the ability to understand and use data effectively to inform decisions. It is composed of a specific skill set and
knowledge base that enables educators to transform data into
information and ultimately into actionable knowledge
(Mandinach, Honey, Light, & Brunner, 2008). These skills
include knowing how to identify, collect, organize, analyze, summarize, and prioritize data. They also include how to develop
hypotheses, identify problems, interpret the data, and determine,
plan, implement, and monitor courses of action. The decisions
that educators need to use data to inform are multiple and
diverse, and data literacy is tailored to the specific use. For
instance, teachers need to combine data literacy with pedagogical
content knowledge (Shulman, 1986) to affect instructional practice. Mandinach (2009, 2012) has termed this pedagogical data
literacy, whereas Means, Chen, DeBarger, and Padilla (2011)
refer to it as instructional decision making.
The Emerging Importance of Data Literacy
The pressures and incentives that are driving the need for data
literacy have come from multiple directions. Four trends also
have emerged: (a) the increased emphasis on data in federal policy, (b) the development of the statewide longitudinal data systems (SLDS), (c) the growth of local data systems, and (d)
additions to standards and accreditation processes that address
data literacy. Furthermore, the push to use data is not unique to
education. Education can learn from the trends seen in medicine
WestEd, East Windsor, NJ
Education Northwest and the National Science Foundation, Portland, OR

1
2

Educational Researcher, Vol. 42 No. 1, pp. 30 37
DOI: 10.3102/0013189X12459803
© 2013 AERA. http://er.aera.net
30

EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER

Downloaded from http://er.aera.net at Univ of the West of England on September 11, 2016

and business, where data-driven practices have been embedded
for many years.

Federal Policy Issues
Arne Duncan, the secretary of education, has extensively
addressed the importance of educators  using data to inform their
practice (Duncan, 2009a, 2009b, 2009c, 2010a, 2010b). Duncan
sees data use as an emerging priority at all levels of the education
system. “I am a believer in the power of data to drive our decisions. Data gives us the roadmap to reform. It tells us where we
are, where we need to go, and who is most at risk” (Duncan,
2009b). Duncan continues,
Our best teachers today are using real time data in ways that
would have been unimaginable just five years ago. They need to
know how well their students are performing. They want to know
exactly what they need to do to teach and how to teach it.
(Duncan, 2009b)

Furthermore, John Easton, the director of the Institute of
Education Sciences (IES), has remarked that he sees the use of
data as the means by which improvement of student learning and
schools will occur (Easton, 2009, 2010). The clear message is that
data-driven decision making is a fundamental process that will
bring about continuous improvement within the education
system.

SLDS
IES has focused on the development of state-level technological
infrastructure through the SLDS Grant Program, which was created for the purpose of developing state technology solutions.
The implicit message is to build the technology first and then
focus on building the human capacity to use the systems and the
data. Since its inception in 2002, the SLDS Program has provided $610 million in funding, including the 2012 funding
cycle. It also included funding through the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act (2009) because data systems are one of its
four pillars. The SLDS Program
is designed to aid state education agencies in developing and
implementing longitudinal data systems. These systems are
intended to enhance the ability of States to efficiently and accurately manage, analyze, and use education data, including individual student records. The data systems developed with funds
from these grants should help States, districts, schools, and teachers make data-driven decisions to improve student learning, as
well as facilitate research to increase student achievement and
close achievement gaps. (National Center for Education Statistics,
2009)

The investment in the SLDS has removed an important roadblock to data use by educators: the concern that data were not
readily available to be examined and analyzed.

Local Data Systems
There is parallel growth of data systems to serve districts, with a
substantial investment in the technological infrastructure at the
local level, the total cost of which is not well established.
Technologies for districts, schools, and classrooms have been an
emerging field for a number of years, with the systems being one
of the key tenets of data-driven decision making (Hamilton et al.,

2009). Means, Padilla, and Gallagher (2010) found that almost
all districts, except the smallest ones, now have some sort of technology to support data-driven decision making.
The technologies are often inextricably interwoven with the
kinds of data that reside in tools (i.e., item-level testing data
in assessment systems or diagnostic data in handhelds), making
it difficult to discuss the specific type of applications without
referring to the characteristics of the data. Wayman (2005, 2007)
identifies four main types of systems: data warehouses, student
information systems, instructional management systems, and
assessment systems. Many other smaller applications also exist,
for example, diagnostic devices and data dashboards for real-time
decision making.

Standards for Teachers and Leaders
Data literacy is a developing theme in the updated standards for
teachers from the Interstate Teacher Assessment and Support
Consortium (InTASC; Council of Chief State School Officers
[CCSSO], 2011) and the Interstate School Leaders Licensure
Consortium (ISLLC; CCSSO, 2008). Data use is directly
addressed in the ISLLC standards. For instance, Standard 1
requires administrators to know how to “collect and use data to
identify goals, assess organization effectiveness, and promote organizational learning” (CCSSO, 2008, p.14). Data collection and
analysis and data use to adapt leadership strategies are addressed in
two additional standards. In the InTASC standards, data use is
indicated in almost 40 knowledge, disposition, and performance
statements that integrate the theme of using data to support teaching and learning across the document.
Clearly, there are strong statements coming from federal policymakers about the importance of using data, coupled with substantial investments of federal and local dollars in creating
technology infrastructures to support the availability of data.
However, the development of human capacity among the nation s
educators to use these systems and applications and to examine
data has not been systematically supported. There has not been a
coordinated effort to train current and future educators to use
data. For example, Means and colleagues (2010) report that more
than 90% of the districts in their sample have provided some
professional development but not for all schools or all teachers.
And it is difficult to ascertain the comprehensiveness and quality
or such training.
Current State of Data Literacy Development
The research base supporting the characterization of data literacy
skills and knowledge adequately demonstrates the complexity of
using data, yet there is little agreement about data literacy as
a construct (Mandinach & Gummer, 2012a). Educators need
multiple experiences to develop data literacy across their careers,
from preservice preparation throughout their career-long development of expertise. The contexts in which educators are prepared to use data in preservice programs and on the job are not
well described.

Characterizing Data Literacy Skills and Knowledge
Multiple researchers have identified the knowledge and skills and
the processes or components that undergird data literacy.

Downloaded from http://er.aera.net at Univ of the West of England on September 11, 2016

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2013

31

• Differentiate instruction to meet the needs of all students
(Long, Rivas, Light, & Mandinach, 2008; Love, Stiles,
Mundry, & DiRanna, 2008).
• Formulate hypotheses about students  learning needs and
instructional strategies (Boudett, City, & Murnane, 2007;
Halverson, Pritchett, & Watson, 2007; Herman & Gribbons,
2001; Love et al., 2008: Mandinach et al., 2008).
• Collect and use multiple sources of data (Bernhardt, 2008;
Goldring & Berends, 2009; Kerr, Marsh, Ikemoto, Darilek,
& Barney, 2006; Love et al., 2008; White, 2005).
• Use formative, summative, interim, benchmark, and common assessments, as well as student classroom work products,
to make decisions (Boudett et al., 2007; Goldring & Berends,
2009; Love et al., 2008; White, 2005).
• Modify instructional practice according to the data collected (Abbott, 2008; Bernhardt, 2008; Mandinach et al.,
2008).
• Drill down to the item level to gain a deeper understanding
of performance (Boudett et al., 2007; Love et al., 2008).
• Use student work, not just tests, and other sources of data
(Bernhardt, 2008; Boudett et al., 2007; Halverson et al.,
2007; Supovitz & Klein, 2003; Wayman & Stringfield,
2006).
• Monitor outcomes (Easton, 2009; Love et al., 2008;
Mandinach et al., 2008).
• Focus on all children, not just the “bubble kids” (BooherJennings, 2005; Brunner et al., 2005; Love et al., 2008).
• Look for causes of failure that can be remediated (Boudett
et al., 2007; Love et al., 2008).
• Work in data teams to examine data (Halverson et al., 2007;
Long et al., 2008).
Administrative data literacy requires many of these same skills
but integrates educational leadership and management skills.
Some of the skills mentioned include planning for data use, preparing for group structures, understanding and allowing for collaboration (Chen, Heritage, & Lee, 2005; Halverson, Gregg,
Pritchett, & Thomas, 2005; Lachat & Smith, 2005; Supovitz &
Klein, 2003), establishing a vision for data use (Hamilton et al.,
2009), aligning learning goals with available data, and providing
for distributed leadership (Lachat & Smith, 2005; Park &
Datnow, 2009). Knapp, Swinnerton, Copland, and MonpasHuber (2006) noted that there is little understanding of how
administrative data literacy is defined.
Data literacy is often confused with assessment literacy,
though the distinctions between the two have not been clearly
explicated in the research literature. There is no doubt that
understanding assessment is an important component in datadriven decision making (Brookhart, 2001; Heritage & Yeagley,
2005; Herman & Gribbons, 2001; Popham, 1999; Shaw, 2005).
Yet assessments as data collected from classroom, school, district,
and state measures of student achievement are only one type of
data that enter into the decision-making process. Data literacy
requires knowledge of other data, such as perception, motivation,
process, and behavior. Thus, the field needs to refine what is
meant by data literacy and skills and knowledge needed to engage
in data use and a variety of data (Mandinach & Gummer, 2012a)
to reduce the confusion with assessment literacy.
32

EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER

Current Practices at Universities and in
Professional Development
Secretary Duncan (2012) has challenged schools of education to
step up and meet the growing need to improve current and future
educators  data literacy. He has stated that the institutions must
help prepare educators to use data more effectively than they have
done in the past. Although there is a growing emphasis from
policymakers, there is little reliable evidence regarding the extensiveness of courses on data-driven decision making and what
schools of education are doing to respond to the new federal
emphasis on this practice.
The research and practice literature consistently discusses the
lack of human capacity around data use (Choppin, 2002;
Feldman & Tung, 2001; Hamilton et al., 2009; Herman &
Gribbons, 2001; Ikemoto & Marsh, 2007: Mandinach, 2009;
Mandinach & Honey, 2008; Mason, 2002; Miller, 2009;
Wayman & Stringfield, 2006), but to date, there is no systematic
empirical evidence about the prevalence of course offerings in
schools of education that can address the development of data
literacy other than a small and limited survey (Mann & Simon,
2010). We know that courses are only now beginning to emerge.
Some courses are limited to graduate-level seminars for administrators (J. Wayman, personal communication, February 7, 2011).
Such courses are often small in size and highly focused. Some
courses have broad reach by using a virtual portal (B. Bellucci,
personal communication, February 17, 2011; Mann & Simon,
2010). Undergraduate courses for teacher candidates seem to be
sporadic, most often with instruction on data-driven practices
subsumed in existing offerings, such as measurement, statistics,
instruction, or methods.
There are examples of successfully integrating data-driven
decision making through a school of education s curriculum.
Western Oregon University has a preservice curriculum infused
with data-driven concepts whereby the faculty members are
expected to use data and evidence to inform teaching and learning (H. Rosselli, personal communication, May 26, 2011). A
culture of evidence has been created, and faculty must use datadriven principles in their teaching. Professors model data-driven
decision making by (a) collecting baseline data, (b) using those
data for course improvement as well as for identifying student
learning needs, (c) modifying instruction on the basis of the data,
and (d) assessing again to determine impact. Data link proficiencies to performance to create a cycle of continuous improvement.
Faculty members explicitly model this process and expect their
students to do their same in their practice. Student practica
require the use of real-time data. In more than 9 years through
strategic hiring, this institution has transformed itself into a
learning organization with a culture of evidence in which data
serve as the impetus for change.
University faculty also can adopt examples and methods used
by professional development providers that have programs for
in-service educators. There are many opportunities, topics, and
techniques that can be generalized to formal courses or strategically integrated into existing courses from these training models.
There is also a current effort to understand the characteristics
of these programs and the missing components (Mandinach &
Gummer, 2012b).

Downloaded from http://er.aera.net at Univ of the West of England on September 11, 2016

Helping educators to gain data literacy requires a developmental approach to skill acquisition. Most of the attention to
date has focused on training the current cohort of teachers and
administrators through in-service and professional development
opportunities. Typically, principals are trained first, and then
using a turnkey model, teachers are trained (Mandinach, 2009).
There is anecdotal evidence that course offerings for administrators are more prevalent than for teachers. Yet the field lacks
concrete evidence of how course offerings differ across the spectrum from preservice to postgraduate levels (Mandinach &
Gummer, 2012b) or how courses on data-driven decision making should differ at different points in educators  careers
(Mandinach, Gummer, & Muller, 2011).
The Need for a Systems Approach to Build Data
Literacy Among Educators
Systems thinking is the attempt to understand the interrelationships among components in complex systems. It serves an integrative function to address a complex problem, such as the
building of data literacy for educators. It allows organizations or
institutions to focus on the whole rather than individual components of the system. With systems thinking, organizations examine the structure or the interrelationships among components
that influence behavior over time. System thinking recognizes the
hierarchical nature of phenomena and operation within multiple
levels, such as schools within districts within states (Mandinach
& Cline; 1994; Mandinach, Rivas, Light, & Heinze, 2006; Senge
et al., 2000; Senge, 1990; Williams & Hummelbrunner, 2011).
Senge s (1990) framework examines wholes with respect to
change and looks at the complexity of interactions among system
components, identifying underlying structures and causes. A systems approach helps organizations to identify leverage points and
determine where and when actions can be taken to effect change.
Systems thinking also relies on the systematic collection and
analysis of data for self-reflection and considers the consequences
of decisions.

Stakeholders and Their Roles
The first step in characterizing the systemic nature of improving
the use of data by educators is a characterization of the key stakeholders in the system. Our articulation of the stakeholders and
their roles and responsibilities arose from the convening of
researchers, deans, and accreditation experts (Mandinach et al.,
2011). The objective of this Spencer-funded meeting was for
stakeholders to discuss issues around how data-infused courses
could be implemented in schools of education.
Schools of education. Schools of education are a key stakeholder in
improving educator data literacy by integrating data-focused
courses or concepts into educator preparation programs. We
envision an enhanced role for schools of education, introducing
data literacy early and affirming its importance throughout an
educator s career to support the enculturation of data use.
School districts and practitioners. Schools of education are not the
only stakeholder in the efforts to improve educator data literacy.
A second stakeholder in the system is the school district and
the practitioners who actually carry out the requirements of data
use. Districts employ educators who may lack the skills and

knowledge around data use but who must acquire the capacity to
use data. Districts may seek help from schools of education
because they lack the resources or the internal capacity to implement broad-scale training on data-driven decision making.
Districts look to schools of education for courses for their current
staff. They can look to the schools of education to produce new
teachers who have data skills and who show competence in data
use (Mandinach & Gummer, 2012b; Mandinach et al., 2011).
Some districts require candidates for positions to demonstrate
data literacy as a requirement of the hiring process (Long et al.,
2008).
Professional development providers. Experts in professional development are another stakeholder with a history of working with
practicing educators to help them develop understandings of
data-driven practice. Schools of education can learn from the
professional development providers about how to develop courses
on the topic or how to integrate data-driven concepts into existing courses. Schools of education could even look to the professional development providers as a resource in teaching courses,
including face-to-face courses and virtual courses, or for continuing education credits. Schools of education do not have to hire
additional faculty or allot a faculty position to someone who
knows data. Professional developers can broaden their range of
influence. Most importantly, more educators will be introduced
to data-driven practices and become data literate.
State education agencies. States and their credentialing agencies
can have a major impact on the introduction of courses on datadriven decision making if they expand and make explicit requirements that schools of education prepare educators on data use.
Schools of education will have to respond to such requirements
in state licensing and accreditation rules. According to a selfreport survey of state data directors, results indicate that 10 states
have requirements for data training for superintendents, 13 for
principals, and 14 for teachers (Data Quality Campaign, 2011,
2012). Only 11 states require data literacy as a part of the preservice credential or licensure process.
Professional organizations. Other organizations have critical roles
in helping to establish data-driven decision making in educator
preparation, driving the need for more systematic preparation in
data literacy for educators with accreditation and licensing regulations. Professional organizations, such as the National Board
for Professional Teaching Standards, the National Council for
Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE), and the American
Association of Colleges for Teacher Education, can provide an
impetus for creating change, explicitly emphasizing data literacy
in standards and evidence for accreditation. For instance,
NCATE s Blue Ribbon Panel (2010) released a comprehensive
set of recommendations for the future of teacher preparation that
are far-reaching and are intended to have a direct impact on training educators to use data. The panel states that teacher candidates
“need to have opportunities to reflect upon and think about what
they do, how they make decisions, and how they  theorize  their
work, and how they integrate their content knowledge and pedagogical knowledge into what they do” (Blue Ribbon Panel, 2010,
p. 9). The report further states that teacher preparation must provide “the opportunity to make decisions and to develop skills to

Downloaded from http://er.aera.net at Univ of the West of England on September 11, 2016

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2013

33

analyze student needs and adjust practices using student performance data while receiving continuous monitoring and feedback
from mentors” (Blue Ribbon Panel, 2010, p. 10). These are the
principles of data-driven decision making and continuous
improvement applied to teacher preparation and to practice.
CCSSO has a wide range of activities, some of which can
target the importance of the use of data and training educators to
use data. CCSSO convenes meetings of top educational officials
who can influence change in their states by initiating discussions
that may lead to the inclusion of data literacy among licensure
and certification requirements. Consortia supported by CCSSO
can include among their standards more explicit references to
data literacy skills as they apply to the professions. The challenge
is making the standards operational.
Testing organizations can integrate data-driven concepts into
their assessments for teachers and administrators at the behest of
licensing agencies. If the assessments are a required part of the
credentialing or licensure process, then schools of education are
likely to respond by ensuring their students are prepared for the
examinations. Currently, data-driven decision making is not part
of the PRAXIS test, but it is included in the School Leaders
Licensure Assessment. The latter requires data-driven decision
making through the analysis of different sources of data and
information to form a decision (Educational Testing Service,
2005). We suspect that if data-driven decision making is required
on tests for teachers and administrators, schools of education will
be forced to respond by teaching to the test. Testing companies
will build such assessments if professional organizations and
states require such skills and knowledge.
U.S. Department of Education. Finally, the federal government can
play more of a role in emphasizing the need for data literacy beyond
the speeches government officials have made. To date, there is neither a federal mandate nor specific funding program to stimulate
the training of educators. Although substantial funds have been
devoted to the development of the technological infrastructure, no
monies have been similarly devoted to building the capacity of
educators to use data to improve teaching and learning.
What Needs to Happen
We have emphasized three fundamental premises. First, datadriven decision making must become part of an educator s preparation. Educators must receive systematic training in how to use
data, preferably beginning in their preservice years but continuing throughout their careers. Second, schools of education are the
appropriate venue in which the needed educational experiences
must occur. Schools of education must find ways to integrate
data-driven practices and principles into the training of educators. Finally, we have discussed the roles of many of the key players we see as creating an environment for change.
It is reasonable that schools of education must be the driving
force for improving data literacy, as the preservice preparation
period is a major opportunity for the development of knowledge
and skills. However, the introduction of a data-use focus into
programs or courses may not be simple. It is unclear whether
there is sufficient motivation or perceived need on the part of
schools of education. It is unclear whether current faculty members are sufficiently data literate to be able to teach such courses.
34

EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER

A related issue is whether deans of schools of education believe
that having a faculty slot devoted to data-driven decision making
is important. This is an issue of perceived need as well as prioritization. Other priority and pressing university needs may trump
such appointments (Mandinach et al., 2011).
There is little agreement whether it is best to have stand-alone
courses or whether data concepts should be subsumed within
existing courses. Questions abound about whether and how data
use should be integrated into practica so that candidates can gain
experience working with authentic data. What is the most effective format of courses or integrated concepts to educate them on
the topic? Furthermore, how do these decisions differ for courses
aimed at administrative candidates? When is the right time to
integrate data-driven decision making (Mandinach & Gummer,
2012b)?
Many questions still remain about how schools of education
and other agencies can best respond to address the growing need
to build capacity among current and future educators to use data
(Mandinach et al., 2011). Our recommendations for stimulating
progress in the field focus on two areas of need. First, there is a
need for research to address the gaps in the scientific knowledge
base to help stakeholders understand the changes that need to
occur in educational practice. Second, representatives, policymakers, and decision makers need to come together to discuss
and work out the action steps necessary to ensure that educators
know how to use data to inform their practice.

Research Needs
Research on current practices. As described in the previous sections,
a major gap in the field s knowledge about data-driven decision
making is how educators currently acquire data literacy. The lack
of knowledge of what courses exist and whether and how schools
of education are attempting to address the growing need to build
human capacity around data use hampers the development of
systematic processes for improvement.
There is a clear need for a scientific and comprehensive survey
and inventory of the existence of courses and the extent to which
data-driven practices are integrated into existing courses. This
need was made explicit during the meeting of experts on which
this article is grounded (Mandinach et al., 2011). Such a survey
is planned for the 2012 academic year (Mandinach & Gummer,
2012b).
Additionally, it is necessary to understand how states are dealing with the issue. Researchers and policy implementers need to
know what accreditation and licensure requirements around data
literacy have been issued by the states, how those requirements
are being implemented, and how institutions of higher education
are responding. The information from such a comprehensive survey and inventory will provide fundamental data from which
policy organizations and schools of education can build and
respond. Currently, there is only anecdotal information that is
insufficient and even inappropriate, given the policy and practice
emphasis on the importance of data-driven practice.
Research on the impact of data use. Another gap in the field s
knowledge base is whether the use of data changes classroom
practice and, ultimately, student performance. A recent study
(Carlson, Borman, & Robinson, 2011) found mixed results for
mathematics and reading achievement from a districtwide data-

Downloaded from http://er.aera.net at Univ of the West of England on September 11, 2016

driven reform intervention. The field still needs to more clearly
understand what impact there might be at the student and
teacher levels as well, including the intended and unintended
consequences.
Research on policy. There are several policy-oriented issues to be
addressed and better understood. First and foremost, there needs
to be an alignment between what districts, schools, and educators
actually do and need and the actions that schools of education
might take to integrate data-driven practices into educator
preparation programs. It would be remiss to make changes without consulting the ultimate stakeholders and end users local
education agencies. Schools of education should be responsive to
those needs, whether adapting their course offerings or providing
outreach through continuing education opportunities.
There is a need to explore the role that the states can play in
setting future policy and developing and mandating licensure
and certification requirements for all educators and to address the
following: (a) Can and will states require that educator preparation programs offer training on data use? (b) Will schools of education be held accountable for their graduates to show evidence
of data literacy? (c) Can and will testing organizations introduce
components of assessments that measure data use and data literacy? (d) Will such requirements stimulate change throughout the
education system and impact practice?
The role the federal government might play beyond making
public policy statements about the need for educators to be data
literate should be addressed. A policy analysis might address (a)
whether resources can be provided for helping to train the current
cohort of educators and (b) what the U.S. Department of
Education can do. Parallel policy analysis research might also
address the roles that states can play.
Research on developmental needs of educators. We still do not understand the differing needs of diverse groups of educators in terms of
preparation for data-driven practice. Research is needed to understand data literacy preparation needs of teachers as opposed to
administrators and of novices as opposed to experts. As noted
above, educators  needs will differ and the field can benefit from
understanding those differences and how best to provide education
and training on data literacy to address the diversity.

Strengthen the Discourse Around Educator Preparation
This article has discussed the complexity of infusing data practices into the preparation of educators. The research we recommend above is a necessary but insufficient component of
improving data literacy. What also is needed is high-level support
from policymakers and relevant stakeholders. It is not clear where
and how data-driven courses can and should be integrated into
course work. This is, in part, because of the diversity of needs
across preservice and in-service, and teachers and administrators.
Continued discussion among the relevant agencies can help to
address some of the questions and issues we have identified. It is
our belief that change will not happen if each agency functions in
isolation without a more comprehensive approach to the issue.
The meeting that we convened in 2011 (Mandinach et al., 2011)
brought together some but not all necessary participant groups.
A more comprehensive and higher-level meeting is needed where
officials from federal and state education agencies, the profes-

sional education organizations, deans of schools of education,
credentialing organizations, and other interested parties come
together to not just discuss what needs to be done to affect change
but actually map out policy changes that will necessitate and create the change that is needed.
Bringing together stakeholders who can make action happen
may be an effective means by which progress can begin to occur.
The development of a systemic, comprehensive, and strategic
plan is needed. If the field is left to a piecemeal approach to
action, nothing is going to happen and little, if any, progress will
be realized. This issue requires buy-in from many, at different
levels, and from varied organizations. Obtaining that agreement
requires leveraging at the appropriate sources of influence. It will
not be easy because of the interdependencies and complexities,
but it is possible.
